[SWOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>ANDREW HOLECEK: The
practices that you
do in the dream state can
be seven to nine times more
efficacious or
transformative than what
you do in the waking state.
>>GEORGE NOORY: That's huge.
>>HOLECEK: By going so deeply
into the center of yourself,
well, guess what happens?
Like a Mobius strip, you find
yourself coming back out.
We're hacking into previously
unconscious domains of mind
as a way to accelerate
evolution and development.
But here's where it
gets really interesting.
Once you become lucid, there
are about nine practices
that one can do.
They're kind of a
pedagogy of the future.
They represent a provocative
kind of night school.
>>NOORY: Dreaming is like
dying, sort of, isn't it?
>>HOLECEK: It truly is.
Same proficiency you develop
in the nighttime dream
then extends into the
dream at the end of time.
The good thing about all
this is that you can actually
train yourself.
>>NOORY: How would you do that?
>>HOLECEK: We actually start
to realize, oh my gosh.
The aperture of my
awareness is so constricted,
you're leaving out
2/3 of reality.
Patient--
>>NOORY: And it illuminates.
Well, welcome to
"Beyond Belief,"
another amazing program for you.
Dr. Andrew Holecek is with us.
He's an author, humanitarian
who teaches internationally
on meditation, lucid
dreaming, and conscious dying.
Andrew, welcome to the program.
>>HOLECEK: George,
thank you for having me.
>>NOORY: What is conscious
dying, by the way?
>>HOLECEK: [LAUGHS] Yeah.
It's in my languaging
using the nocturnal arena
as a lucid dreaming.
You could also talk
about it as lucid dying.
It's actually a way
to maintain awareness
as one goes through this
transitional process.
And there's a way to
actually rehearse it, George.
When you do nocturnal
practices, there's
a way to kind of grease
the skids for lucid dying.
>>NOORY: How did you get
involved in this kind of work?
>>HOLECEK: I have always
had a very deep fascination
with mind, consciousness.
Like, what is mind?
What is consciousness?
And decades ago, I
started meditating.
I started originally in the
transcendental meditation
movement.
I had a very kind of profound
opening during that period.
And then began a somewhat
rigorous systematic search
through the world's
wisdom traditions.
Came across the
Buddhist tradition,
and was deeply attracted to how
connected Buddhism-- really,
the word Buddha comes from a
root meaning the awakened one.
>>NOORY: The awakened one.
>>HOLECEK: Exactly.
How it relates to both
sleeping, dreaming, and dying.
And there's a very
intimate connection
between all these aspects.
And in the wisdom
traditions, you
can actually work with
dimensions of mind
that allow you to prepare for
things like conscious dying.
They're also obviously
intimately connected
to conscious sleeping.
That's what lucid dreaming is.
>>NOORY: Dreaming is like dying.
Sort of, isn't it?
>>HOLECEK: It truly is, George.
And in fact, in
the Tibetan arena,
which probably has the world's
richest literature on this,
they actually talk about
three types of dream.
One is the nighttime dream.
Then the dream-- what they call
the dream at the end of time,
which is what we know as death.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>HOLECEK: And then the most
important dream is this.
They talk about--
>>NOORY: The reality.
>>HOLECEK: --this,
the reality dream.
And that is, in fact, what the
Buddha woke up to, the nature
of reality, waking up from a
particular kind of nightmare,
which we can talk about, and
actually, somewhat ironically,
into a dreamlike reality.
>>NOORY: Andrew, what are
nocturnal meditations?
>>HOLECEK: Nocturnal
meditations.
This is a term that
I engage to describe
five progressive
practices that one
can engage in every single
night as they sleep.
And so the first one is
called liminal dreaming,
used to be called hypnagogic,
hypnopompic dreaming.
But liminality itself is
a really compelling term.
It means threshold.
And so it's that dream like--
that kind of state, George,
where you're not quite asleep.
You're not quite awake.
You're kind of
floating between--
>>NOORY: In between.
>>HOLECEK: In between state.
That's literally what
bardo means in Tibetan.
And so liminal dreaming
greases the skids
for what's called
lucid dreaming.
That's probably the most famous
of the nocturnal meditations,
the one that's been
scientifically studied,
proven since the '70s.
This is when you
attain full awareness.
Lucidity, consciousness.
You're dreaming and you
know you're dreaming.
It's like the movie "Inception."
The next step is what's
called dream yoga, which
this is where, instead of
one of the characteristics
of lucid dreaming, it's more
psychological in nature.
>>NOORY: Spiritual?
>>HOLECEK: Well, not quite.
So lucid dreaming per
se is more psychological
and about self-fulfillment.
Dream yoga is more spiritual
and about self-transcendence.
>>NOORY: Well, we have
on the Gaia program
of "Mystery Teachings,"
physicist Theresa Bullard
talks about the benefits of
dreaming in a spiritual way.
>>HOLECEK: Exactly right.
>>NOORY: Let's watch this.
>>HOLECEK: Fantastic.
>>THERESA BULLARD: Do
you remember your dreams?
Have you ever
experienced a dream that
felt like it really happened?
Or have you ever become
lucid during a dream,
aware of the fact that
you were dreaming?
We spend nearly one third
of our life sleeping.
What's happening
during this time?
Of course, our body
is resting, but what's
happening with our spirits,
our consciousness and mind?
Could it be that dreams are
another version of reality?
Ever since I was really young,
I've had super vivid dreams.
Being aware of my
dreams and sharing them
with my parents and friends has
always been a part of my life.
Because of this, my dream time
has been a very enriching part
of my life.
Both my parents
were active students
of the Edgar Cayce readings.
And in addition, my dad studied
parapsychology and the work
of Carl Jung while in college.
And my mom's a college professor
of inter and intrapersonal
communications.
Plus, she was really involved
with the Monroe Institute
that explores consciousness
and journeys out of body.
So we developed a
family tradition
of sharing dreams and
interpreting them, especially
when they felt significant.
In this episode, I'd
like to share with you
some of what I've learned about
our life in the dream time.
Dreams can be such a
useful guide in our life.
They can help us solve problems,
receive insights and higher
teachings from higher planes,
learn about ourselves, and so
much more.
So I'd like to share some
useful methods with you
for becoming more in tune
with your dream time.
When we talk about
dreams, the first question
that often comes up is,
does everybody dream?
Some people swear
that they don't dream,
but science shows dreaming
is a part of our sleep cycle.
Even if we aren't aware of
it or remember our dreams
when we wake up, we all dream.
Everyone goes through
a couple of REM cycles
at night, which is marked
by rapid eye movement
during our sleep.
And during this
time, the brain is
firing off with similar
patterns to when we're conscious
and awake.
Only in this case,
we're dreaming.
But for the most
part, our brain can't
tell the difference between
dreaming and wakefulness.
So everybody dreams.
Whether we remember it or not
is another matter altogether.
>>NOORY: So where do these
nocturnal meditations
fit in here, Andrew?
>>HOLECEK: Oh my goodness.
Well, there's a host of them.
Once you become lucid,
once you actually
wake up to the dream arena,
there are about nine practices
that one can do, each one
progressively more refined,
more subtle, more nuanced.
>>NOORY: That's a lot.
>>HOLECEK: That's a lot.
And some of them are
exceedingly profound.
I mean, the eighth and
ninth stages of dream yoga
allow one to actually
descend into what's
called lucid sleep, which
is the fourth practice
of the nocturnal curricula.
Believe it or not,
George-- and scientists
are actively
working on this now.
I'm advising some
research scientists
trying to prove this.
This has not been
scientifically proven yet.
It's been in the
wisdom traditions
for thousands of years.
Scientists are now
trying to actually--
>>NOORY: What's taken them
so long to prove this?
>>HOLECEK: It's very
difficult to send a signal
from deep dreamless sleep.
In the dream state, even
though your body is temporarily
paralyzed-- it's
called sleep atonia--
>>NOORY: Sleep paralysis.
Yeah.
>>HOLECEK: --you can
still send a signal
by moving your eyelids.
I should say moving
your eyes, which
can register with devices.
You can also hold
your breathing,
so diaphragmatic
messages can be sent.
But in the deep dreamless
state, it's very difficult
to send a signal.
So what you have to do
is a two-fold approach.
You have to bookend
the experience.
In other words, you send a
signal to the people in the lab
before you drop into that space.
They monitor it with
their instrumentation.
You experience basically
formless dimensions of mind.
>>NOORY: They're still
monitoring you, right?
>>HOLECEK: They're
still monitoring you.
And when you pop
out of that space,
then you send another signal.
You can do that with
your eyes as well.
And then you come
out as an oneironaut.
That's a wonderful
term for those
who explore the dream arena.
Like astronauts explore
outer space, oneironauts--
oneirology is the
study of dreams--
oneironauts study the
inner space of the mind.
And so then the
oneironaut comes out,
gives their first-person
phenomenological report.
This is what I experienced.
And then we try to collect
enough data to make it happen.
I should say, to make the
verification using questions
like--
>>NOORY: Do you ever
see the day where
computer checks
will be on the skull
and you'll literally be able
to see your dream, my dream,
on a screen kind of
like a television?
>>HOLECEK: Well,
they're starting--
there's some very
interesting people at MIT.
We're heading in that direction.
Because as you
know, George, there
are neurological correlates
to particular experiences.
It's called neurophenomonology.
So you have a
particular experience,
and there's a neural signature.
And so now the
scientists can actually
read these neural
signatures and gain
a very powerful
suggestion, intimation,
in terms of what you're
actually dreaming.
So the reason I get really so
excited about this material,
somewhat in reference to
this video we just saw,
is that in my view,
these practices really--
they're kind of a
pedagogy of the future.
They represent a kind
of very provocative kind
of night school where-- think
about what you could do.
According to the great
Tantric traditions,
George, the
practices that you do
in the dream state--
and this is important,
because why should
I bother with this?
My life is so full.
I'm so busy.
Why should I do
this type of stuff?
Well, according to the Tantric
traditions and even some very
interesting neuroscience,
the practices
that you do in the dream state
can be seven to nine times more
efficacious or
transformative than what
you do in the waking state.
>>NOORY: That's huge.
>>HOLECEK: And it's like
what she was saying.
The brain cannot tell the
difference between something
that's experienced,
visualized, or dreamt.
And so--
>>NOORY: It's real to the brain.
>>HOLECEK: It's
real to the brain.
And then so where this
gets super interesting
is using the principles
of neuroplasticity.
This is a very hot topic
in neuroscience these days,
that what you do with your
mind changes your brain.
And so literally, they've
done studies where
if you're working--
I'm a musician.
If I'm playing the
piano in a dream,
my right hemisphere
will be activated,
and they can detect
that exactly as
if I was playing at the
keyboard in so-called real life.
>>NOORY: Will they know what
you're doing in the dream?
>>HOLECEK: Well,
again, the granularity
isn't there 100% yet.
>>NOORY: It's not there.
>>HOLECEK: It's not quite there
yet, but they're heading there.
But if you're doing,
for instance--
>>NOORY: Will they know
if you're in distress?
Let's say a nightmare.
>>HOLECEK: Well, there are other
registrations for nightmares.
The amygdala gets activated,
respiration gets heightened.
There are other factors that
can bring about registration
of stress states.
So that one is not that
terribly difficult to pick up
neuroscientifically.
But the really
important point here
is that what you do
in the dreaming state
can be actually more
transformative than what
you do in the waking
state, because you're
working with foundational
dimensions of mind.
You're working with kind
of substrate dimensions
that really--
I use the analogy
of tectonic plates.
It's like what you do--
the mind shifts in
a tectonic plate
down there can have vast surface
repercussions and implications.
And so this is why I like
to preach a little bit
about this stuff, because it has
so much pedagogical potential.
In fact, a neuroscientist,
a very famous one,
Matthew Walker, wrote
the wonderful book
called "Why We Sleep."
It's very interesting, George.
In this book, he only devotes
three pages to lucid dreaming.
The fact that he devotes
anything is remarkable.
But in this book, he
says the following.
He says, it is entirely
possible that lucid dreamers
represent the next iteration
in homo sapiens evolution.
>>NOORY: Wow.
That's a big statement.
>>HOLECEK: It's a big statement.
And this is from a
hard-hitting neuroscientist.
And so I can attest in my own
experience when I've had dreams
like she was alluding to--
they're called hyper lucid
dreams--
dreams that are actually
more real than this,
you wake up from
one of those dreams,
and this appears to
be the foggy dream.
And the reason these
dreams are so compelling
is it's not too dissimilar
to what happens when you
have a near-death experience.
You don't have to have
a near-death experience
over and over for it
to change your life.
Why is that?
>>NOORY: Just one time.
>>HOLECEK: One time.
Why?
Because it's so foundational.
Because you're dealing with
something so true, so deep,
so irrevocable that one
experience like that
can change the course
of your entire life.
And so you can also have
these hyper lucid dreams
that are very similar to that.
And the literature is replete
with these accounts, especially
the spiritual traditions, where
people wake up in the morning.
They are really
different from the way
they were when
they went to sleep,
because they're working with
such foundational dimensions
of the mind.
>>NOORY: On "Gaia
News," they have
discussed some scientific
research on dreaming.
>>HOLECEK: Oh, fantastic.
[SOFT MUSIC]
>>NARRATOR: The lucid
dream is a state
of being aware that you're
dreaming and possibly
having some control
over what happens in it.
It is estimated that
some 50% of people
have had one,
especially in childhood.
Scientists have been studying
this phenomenon for decades,
but haven't been able to
adequately explain it,
because a person's recounting
of dreams upon waking
is often unreliable.
But recently, scientists
have made a breakthrough
by showing that people
can both comprehend
questions and provide answers
to them all while they're
dreaming.
A team of international
researchers
studied 36 people with
the goal of finding a way
to communicate with them
while they were dreaming.
The results were groundbreaking.
Charlie Morley is a dream
researcher who teaches people
how to lucid dream.
He had this to say about
the importance of the study.
>>CHARLIE MORLEY:
Up to this point,
there's been no way to
directly communicate
to the lucid dreamer while
they're in the lucid dream.
You can give them
instructions before.
You can speak to
them afterwards.
But while they're in that
internal virtual reality
simulation of their own mind,
there's a blackout in comms.
The brilliant thing
about this new study
is that blackout
was broken through.
They could actually communicate
to the lucid dreamer
while they were inside
the lucid dream.
>>NARRATOR: How exactly
did they do this?
>>MORLEY: What
they discovered is
once you're in a
lucid dream, you
can actually direct your
physical eyes at will.
So using a form of
literal Morse code,
flicking the eyes
left, right, up,
down to indicate
certain responses,
they were able to
communicate with the dreamer
while they were still asleep.
How did they enter the dream?
Three main different ways.
One person said it came through
a car radio in the dream.
Suddenly, the radio
station changed
and they could hear the
voice of the scientist.
Another person said it
was like the voice of God.
It just came down from the sky.
And another person said it
was like a narrator in a film.
They would then reply,
yes, I can hear you,
by doing two eye
flicks to the left,
or whatever code they had
pre-decided to indicate yes.
Full-on communication
back and forth
while the person is
still in the dream.
>>NOORY: I think
science is really
going to get us these answers.
>>HOLECEK: I do too.
It's so fun.
These are all my friends.
>>NOORY: Your buddies.
That's what I thought.
>>HOLECEK: It's really
delightful to see them,
isn't it?
>>NOORY: What are
liminal beings?
>>HOLECEK: Liminal beings?
Yeah.
Again, liminality, it's
a very compelling--
not only a state of
consciousness, but a very
compelling phenomena.
So liminal beings
are those who just
don't fit the standard mold.
LGBTQ.
I mean, the people--
artists, creator
types, people that you
can't pigeonhole
or shrink wrap into
the traditional categories.
So not only do you have
liminal beings, liminal dreams,
you also have
liminal experiences.
Like for instance, when you fly
home tonight, when you first
arrive, you're not quite there.
You're not quite here.
You're in this kind
of transitional space.
Liminal places like
hallways, workplaces
after hours, empty theaters.
Places that have a
sense of transition
are also liminal places.
So liminality is, I think, a
very compelling way to expand
and open our minds to horizons
beyond the usual conventional
shrink wrapping.
>>NOORY: Is it healthy?
>>HOLECEK: Is it healthy?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>HOLECEK: Oh, I think
so, because what it does
is it helps dislodge our
exclusive identification
with things, people,
places, and the like.
It creates a more fluid, open,
kind of malleable relationship
to phenomena.
And it's like, this
effect is deeply connected
to dream yoga and ties
into this wonderful maxim
that I love so much,
which is blessed
are the flexible, for they are
never bent out of shape, right?
So liminality really works
with the type of flexibility
of consciousness.
You're playing in the
froth of perception,
as it's sometimes said, or
the plasma of mind, right?
A kind of dimension
of experience
that's not quite fully formed.
It's starting to
what's called de-reify,
a dimension of experience
that's not so solid.
And the minute we have
that space, George,
we're more tolerant and
understanding of others.
We're less concretized.
>>NOORY: We're not as uptight.
>>HOLECEK: We're not as uptight.
Exactly.
We're more playful.
I think a common kind of
affective or emotional kind
of component of this is a more
delightful, playful, childlike
wonder in terms of
relating to the world.
Because you realize on one
level that this thing really
is very much like a dream.
And that is, in fact,
what not just the Buddha,
but really the
nandu wisdom masters
have all proclaimed, that
when you actually wake up
to the nature of
reality, you wake up
to something that appears very
dreamlike, fluid, malleable.
In Buddhist jargon,
it's called emptiness.
The world is empty of
all our projections,
our imputations,
our hopes and fears.
And therefore, we're much more
responsive instead of reactive.
If we hold our
views too solidly,
we get confrontational,
defensive, offensive, reactive.
So these practices that
seem so esoteric actually
have tremendous
exoteric applications.
>>NOORY: Why are some
people unable to remember
their dreams?
>>HOLECEK: [LAUGHS] Well,
there's so many reasons.
It's like she was saying, we
have at least five dream cycles
a night.
>>NOORY: That's a lot.
>>HOLECEK: Yeah, exactly.
First one is maybe 10 minutes.
Then as we go through
the night, you
enter towards the
end of the night
the fourth or fifth phase,
90-minute cycles, what
I call prime time dream time.
You can be in REM for
90 minutes at a shot,
so you can have
long lucid dreams.
People don't remember them
for a number of reasons.
One is they're not
trained properly.
One is they don't
want to remember.
Stress tends to reduce
a recall in that sense.
But the good thing
about all this
is that you can
actually train yourself.
These are things that
can be exercised.
>>NOORY: How would you do that?
>>HOLECEK: Well, first and
foremost is intentionality.
Intentionality
comes from a root.
It's a very
interesting etymology.
It comes from a root that
means to stretch towards.
And so what you want
to do here is a kind
of consciousness hacking.
You want to stretch the
conscious mind into previously
unconscious domains.
You want to stretch
lucidity, which is just
a code word for
awareness, into previously
non-lucid or non-aware
states, i.e. sleep and dream.
And so intentionality
is massive.
I've actually been to
some dream yoga trainings
with dream yoga
meditation masters.
That's the only
instruction they give.
So the power of intentionality.
Tonight, I'm really going
to remember my dreams.
You can also start
to dream journal.
That's been proven--
>>NOORY: That works.
That works.
>>HOLECEK: Totally works.
You keep a journal
at your bedside.
You put your money
where your mouth is.
You start to record
snippets of dreams.
If you have even the slightest
recollection of a dream,
you stay with that recollection.
And kind of like
picking up the scent,
you go, oh, there's that image.
Close your eyes.
Turn the lens of your mind in.
Turn the mind back in.
And then throughout
the day what you can do
is you can literally just stop,
pause, turn your mind back
in and say, OK.
What was I just thinking
for the last 30 seconds?
Most of the time we live
our lives non-lucidly,
and that's the really
important thing here.
The whole kind of fruition
especially of dream yoga
is what's called
bidirectionality.
Lucid dreaming leads
to lucid living.
>>NOORY: Let's
look more at lucid
dreaming with the Gaia
program "Microdose"
and discuss some interesting
facts about that.
>>HOLECEK: Love it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>NARRATOR: This
ability for the dreamer
to be aware that he
or she is dreaming
is called lucid dreaming.
In this state of
awareness, the dreamer
can learn and receive
guidance from the dream
narrative, environment, and
even the dream characters.
The term lucid
dreaming was coined
by a Dutch psychiatrist named
Frederik van Eeden in 1913.
However, early references
to this phenomenon
can be found in
ancient Greek writings
as well as in ancient Hindu
and Buddhist practices.
In 1975, parapsychologist
Keith Hearn
proved that people can be
conscious in their dreams
by having his test subjects
give coded eye signals
while they were dreaming, thus
proving that they were lucid.
>>DAVID JAY BROWN: When people
were in the dream state,
they were able to communicate by
moving their eyes right, left,
right, left, going
back and forth.
>>REGINA MEREDITH: This
was conscious signaling
from the lucid dream state
world to the lab techs?
>>BROWN: Yes.
And that was what demonstrated
that lucid dreaming was
a reality.
>>NARRATOR: Before jumping
into how to lucid dream,
are there any actual benefits
to learning this practice?
Well, studies show that
lucid dreaming can literally
rewire your brain.
During normal dreaming,
the part of your brain
called the visual
cortex is activated
and your prefrontal
cortex, which
is associated with your sense
of self, is deactivated.
But during a lucid dream,
your prefrontal cortex
suddenly gets activated.
>>MORLEY: Once the prefrontal
cortex is activated,
neuroplasticity
becomes activated too.
And this is where it
gets really interesting.
Neuroplasticity, of
course, the phenomena
of the brain to
rewire itself in favor
of a repeated action or habit.
What you do in the
lucid dream, how
you spend the lucid
dream actually
rewires your brain in
favor of that activity.
This means that you can
learn in your lucid dreams.
>>NOORY: Fascinating
work, Andrew.
>>HOLECEK: And I have to say
one thing about the prefrontal
cortex, George, coming back to--
>>NOORY: And where
is that on the head?
>>HOLECEK: Well, let me explain.
This is really interesting.
So remember that proclamation
from Matthew Walker,
the possibility that
lucid dreamers represent
the next iteration in Homo--
so check this out.
So the most evolutionary--
most recent evolutionary
advances in neuroanatomy,
in the brain structure, are,
in fact, the frontal cortex.
If you could take your eyes
and roll them straight up,
that's what you would see.
This is why, when
you look at an ape,
their head slopes back,
because they don't
have that part of the brain.
So check this out.
So when you come back online in
a lucid dream, as the video was
just suggesting, the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex,
the precuneus, and the
orbitofrontal cortex,
they come back online
in a lucid dream.
So there's actually
neurological or neuroanatomical
footing to Matthew
Walker's claim
that the most recent
evolutionary advances literally
in the brain structure, what's
called metacognitive capacities
of the brain, are exactly the
parts that come back online
when you're having
a lucid dream.
>>NOORY: Does brain damage,
a tumor, affect that?
>>HOLECEK: Yes, it can.
There's been some very
interesting studies going back
all the way to Phineas
Gage who had a rod shot
through his prefrontal cortex.
>>NOORY: Oh my god.
>>HOLECEK: So it does.
There are organic disorders.
There are obviously TBIs,
Traumatic Brain Injuries
and the like that actually
can radically affect that.
But given enough time,
the adaptability,
the malleability of
the brain, as you know,
certain other aspects of the
brain can come in to take over.
It's a wonderful miracle of
the evolutionary trajectory
altogether.
But to me, I find this,
as Charlie was saying,
so beautifully-- this to me is
worth putting an exclamation
point on, because many people
are wondering, like, again,
why should I do this?
Why should I bother?
Well, think about what
you could do here.
We enter the dream
state-- my dear
friend Stephen LaBerge from
Stanford proved it in '77.
Keith Hearn did it
in '75 in England.
We enter the dream state
about 500,000 times.
In an average lifetime, that
amounts to at least six years
in the dream state.
You can get a PhD in
less than six years.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>HOLECEK: So if you
attain lucidity--
and this is why I think what
Matthew was really saying,
I completely stand behind it--
potentially, these nocturnal
meditations, in fact,
represent the pedagogy
of the future.
Once the induction
methods are refined--
and this is the great
contribution from the West.
The East has marvelous
what are called
phenomenological techniques,
first-person meditative
techniques.
>>NOORY: Can you train
someone to lucid dream?
>>HOLECEK: That's exactly
where I was headed with this.
Absolutely.
And that is, in fact,
what makes lucid dreaming,
and in particular dream
yoga, an actual practice.
So there's a whole battery
of both Eastern and Western
approaches that you can
use to not only increase
your recollection of
dream, but the incidence
of lucidity in the dream state,
incidences of hyper lucidity.
And then eventually, that
even matures into lucidity
in the deep dreamless state.
And this is where this
material transitions--
I didn't get to the fifth
of the nocturnal practices.
This is a purely
Tibetan contribution.
The fifth one is
called Bardo yoga.
Bardo is a Tibetan word
very similar to liminal that
basically, if you believe in
this sort of thing, refers
to the gaps between lives,
between incarnations.
And so therefore, the
fruition of all these
practices-- and
in fact, somewhat
in the kind of lens of Hegel,
this Hegelian notion of
transcend but include,
each succeeding practice
transcends but includes
its predecessor,
which means Bardo
yoga transcends what
includes sleep yoga, dream
yoga, lucid dreaming,
and liminal dreaming.
And so the great gift here is
that these practices, according
especially to the Tibetan
view, can radically
help you prepare for death.
And this is even suggested in
Western intellectual thought.
I mean, Thanatos, the
Greek god of death,
Hypnos, the Greek god of sleep,
they're not just brothers.
They're twins.
So there's a very
intimate connection
between sleeping,
dreaming, and dying.
And so what the Tibetans do--
and there are others as well.
The Islamic tradition has
a dream yoga tradition.
I've been in contact
with Islamic scholars.
The Jewish tradition--
>>NOORY: Dying is
like lucid dreaming.
>>HOLECEK: Dying is very
much like lucid dreaming.
And so as I mentioned
earlier, not only
do we have this bidirectional
thing where lucid dreaming can
lead to lucid living, well,
it's actually tridirectional,
which means lucid dreaming
can lead to lucid dying.
It's what we started
talking about at the outset.
Conscious dreaming can lead to
conscious dying, because you're
working arguably, according
to these wisdom traditions,
with the same
dimensions of mind.
And so therefore, if you can
attain lucidity-- in fact,
in the great Tantric traditions
of what's called the Nyingma
school--
if you contain lucidity--
it's an archetypal number.
They say seven times, but we're
not to take it too literally.
It just means with
some constancy.
What they argue is that
the same proficiency
you develop in the
nighttime dream
then extends into the
dream at the end of time.
And therefore, you can have
a lucid, conscious dying
experience where you
maintain awareness
throughout the entire
death trajectory.
And this is where
the great-- this
is a little bit of
a sidebar topic,
but this is where the great
texts like the Tibetan
Book of the Dead come
from, the great masters who
maintain lucidity who can
actually come back like travel
guides and basically share what
they experienced in that space.
Well, we have the same
mind as the Buddha.
We have the same mind
as these great masters.
We just need to train it.
We just need to cultivate it.
And that's why this is not just
rhetoric or metaphysical mumbo
jumbo.
This is a pedagogical approach.
>>NOORY: It's the real deal.
>>HOLECEK: This
is the real deal.
If you engage in the methods--
and the West has some really
interesting contributions
here--
you can engage in lucidity
every single night,
transform-- in fact, let
me share one experience
with you, George.
I was teaching a program where
I mentioned to this woman--
actually, to this class--
that it's actually
entirely possible
that you're already having lucid
dreams, but you don't know it.
Technically for
the deeper divers--
>>NOORY: Well, now that's
a conflict, isn't it?
>>HOLECEK: Well, this is a--
>>NOORY: Because a lucid
dream, you do know it.
>>HOLECEK: But the
difference here--
and this is worth
throwing into the mix--
there's a difference
between what
philosophers call
access consciousness
and phenomenal consciousness.
What that means is you can
have the experience-- that's
the phenomenal consciousness--
but you may not
be able to access it
actively in memory.
That is very interesting to me.
And so when I was telling
this program, this class
about this process, one woman
came up to me afterwards
and she said, you
know, I think you
might have helped me
understand something
I haven't been
able to understand,
that over the last six months,
I'm mysteriously getting better
at this particular thing.
And I think now
what's happening is
I'm actually doing
this in my dream state,
and it's transforming my
ability to do it in waking life.
>>NOORY: Dream yoga.
Let's talk about that
and the Gaia program
"Psychedelica" which talks
about the dream world.
>>HOLECEK: Oh, fantastic.
[OCEAN WAVES]
>>NARRATOR: Every night
when we lay down our day
and exit the familiar world
of waking consciousness,
we set sail for the other shore.
The dream world comes alive.
How did our ancient
ancestors view this space?
Considered to be the
oldest continuous culture
on the planet, the
originals of what is now
called Australia believe
that all creation was
birthed from what the West
termed as the dreaming.
The creation of the world,
the origins of knowledge.
The Indigenous
tribes of Australia
would use shamanic
ceremonies and miming
dances to enter
this space in which
all ancestors and all
information was attainable.
The Westerners who
attempted to translate
the meaning of this space
called it dream time.
Even in the Americas,
accessing the dreaming realm
was a known phenomena
among the Indigenous.
>>KUAUHTLI VASQUEZ: Indigenous
people of this continent
are all from the
same DNA lineage.
It varies, of course, but
there is a common DNA thread
of all the Indigenous people.
Basically, they're all
related, and all of them
had access to what
we call dream time.
Now, dream time is
where the humans
have access to
information that exists
in interdimensional spheres.
And the way this was utilized
in pre-American times
and pre-Hispanic times and
before the colonization
and the Christianization
and all this
where they viewed this
as diabolical or useless
was that they would
find individuals
that had this ability
to remember their dreams
and to be aware in their dreams,
and they would group them
into dreamer societies.
And they would forge a physical
unity through certain dances,
through certain songs,
through drumming practices.
And then they would
go into the dream time
where they could access
visions of the future, visions
of the past, visions
of other places.
>>NOORY: What are some of
the aspects of all of this?
>>HOLECEK: Oh my goodness.
So much comes to mind here.
One thing that
immediately I have to say
is that these practices,
because they're
working with unconscious
dimensions of the mind--
and neuroscience these
days argues very cogently
that at least 95% of
what we do is actually
dictated by unconscious
processes, which
lends tremendous new meaning
to what Christ allegedly
said on the cross, right?
Forgive them, father, for
they know not what they do.
And so what you're doing when
you're working with this stuff
is you're bringing these
unconscious processes
into the light of consciousness.
And in particular,
what's very powerful
is you are revealing
a host of blind spots.
And one of the most
insidious of all blind spots
is actually a type
of discrimination
that we all suffer
from in the West,
and we don't even know it.
It's like what-- they often
attribute it to Mark Twain,
but Josh Billings
actually said it.
It's not what you don't know
that gets you in trouble.
It's what you do know
that just ain't so.
In other words, the things
you take as axiomatic,
the things you take as a
given, they're not givens.
It's called the
myth of the given.
And so the reason
this is important
is that Charles Laughlin,
a neuroanthropologist,
has done a very
interesting set of studies.
And he estimates that outside
of European cultures--
there are some 4,000
Indigenous cultures worldwide--
90% of them are what
are called polyphasic.
In other words, they
derive their insights
into mind and reality
from all dimensions
of consciousness like this.
In the West, we are monophasic.
We're wake-centric.
We derive our insights
from mind and reality
from the waking state.
And so therefore, we're
leaving out categorically 2/3
of reality.
And this is exactly what
this video revealed.
So by engaging in
these practices,
we actually start to
realize, oh my gosh.
The aperture of my
awareness is so constricted,
the lens of my mind
is so small, it's
like the only thing that's
valid and is worth discovering
is what shines itself
in the light of the day,
the diurnal activities.
And what these practices
point out go, you know,
you're shortchanging yourself.
You're leaving out
2/3 of reality.
Look how much you can
experience and learn
if you maintain lucidity
in the dream state
and in the sleep state.
And so again, it just
lends more credibility
to how we're sitting on top
of this vast, untapped natural
resource, which is
our unconscious mind.
And these practices
allow us to bring
all these unconscious
processes into the light
of consciousness.
They reveal a host
of blind spots,
and therefore allow you to see
things that you've actually
never seen before.
And so the analogy
I give, George,
it's like if we were to take
every light in the studio
and just hit it full
on, super bright,
and we're hanging out in
this super bright room
for, I don't know, half an
hour, and then all of the sudden
there's a total blackout, for
the first couple of minutes,
you're not going to see a thing.
Why?
Because your pupils are so
constricted, you can't see.
But what happens, you
relax, be patient--
>>NOORY: And it illuminates.
>>HOLECEK: Everything dilates.
That dilation is a dilation
of the aperture of awareness
itself.
So as the mind--
as the eye relaxes, you start
to see things that have always
been there, but you
hadn't seen them before,
because your lens, the
aperture of your awareness
was too constricted.
And so as we learn to
step into the dark,
into the nocturnal arena, which
is where we go when nature--
when we abide by the
natural curfew of the night.
That's the other thing
that's happening.
Especially in the
West, light pollution
is running rampant in this age.
I think every year, an
annual increase of at least
6% increase in light over--
>>NOORY: Each year?
>>HOLECEK: Over each year.
It's having a massive damaging
effect on the ecosystem,
on our psyches, and whatnot.
And so as we violate
the natural curfew
of the night, which
invites us in--
when it gets dark,
we get inside.
When we go to bed, we
go inside even further.
We're missing out on
this profound opportunity
for growth.
And even Teilhard de Chardin,
the great anthropologist,
once said very,
very compellingly,
evolution hasn't
stopped, connecting it
to the earlier statement.
It's only moved indoors.
And so the evolutionary
trajectory now
is taking place where?
At the arena of the mind.
And so these
practices have so much
applicability in this
modern age to allow
us to add a night shift,
to go to night school,
to bring about this
vast natural resource.
Tap into it, bring it into
the light of consciousness,
and fulfill the
Socratic injunction.
Remember where he
says, know thyself.
>>NOORY: So Andrew, where
does this all take us,
this lucid dream state?
>>HOLECEK: Ah, great
question, George.
I think what it does--
here's the way I look at it.
It's like walking a labyrinth
into the center of yourself,
discovering as you take this
nocturnal journey every night
dimensions of our identity,
dimensions of our being
that have previously
been restricted.
So as I mentioned earlier,
it's a kind of consciousness
hacking, right?
We're hacking into previously
unconscious domains of mind
as a way to accelerate
evolution and development.
But here's where it
gets really interesting,
because not only does--
>>NOORY: Here's the kicker.
>>HOLECEK: Here's the kicker.
Not only does this
labyrinth take you
into the center of
yourself, but it also
doubles as a Mobius strip.
So I'm bringing two
metaphors into play.
By going so deeply into
the center of yourself,
well, guess what happens?
Like a Mobius strip, you find
yourself coming back out.
>>NOORY: Why is it
that in our dream state
we can accomplish things we
can't do when we're awake?
>>HOLECEK: Oh, it's
because we're actually
tapping into the more fluid,
dreamlike dimension of reality.
And so this is a
great topic, George.
The fundamental nature,
the fabric of reality,
especially according to
the Tibetan tradition--
the term is emptiness-- it's a
challenging term to understand.
But emptiness really translates
as openness, as malleability,
as flexibility, as
interdependence.
And so by exploring these
dimensions, you not only
open to yourself and tap
into these natural resources,
but George, you find that
you are deeply, inextricably
connected to every
other sentient
being on this planet,
because your story is
different than mine.
We don't live the same lives.
But the nature of our
being is the same.
>>NOORY: But it works.
>>HOLECEK: It works.
>>NOORY: I've tried it a lot.
It works.
>>HOLECEK: Exactly.
And so by
understanding yourself,
know thyself, when
you understand
your heart and mind
so profoundly, well,
guess what happens?
You understand the
hearts and minds
of all beings on this planet.
And so therefore,
the fruition of this
is tremendous compassion,
kindness, tolerance, empathy,
openness towards
others, because you
realize in the most
immediate, first-person way
that we share the
same bed of mind.
Every night, we drop
into the same bed
of mind, the same
fundamental matrix of mind.
And it's only when we
come up out of that state
with a type of
amnesia, non-lucidly,
that we forget the universality
and the commonality
of the human condition,
that fundamentally we
are, as the Dalai Lama says
so beautifully, fundamentally,
we're all the same.
We all want to be happy.
>>NOORY: That's the bottom line.
>>HOLECEK: We all want
to avoid suffering.
And so this is a beautiful
place to come full circle,
because these
teachings, again, it
can seem so esoteric
and so otherworldly.
They have tremendous
applicability
to benefiting ourselves,
others, and the planet itself.
>>NOORY: Andrew, thanks for
being on "Beyond Belief."
>>HOLECEK: George, it's
been such a delight.
Thanks for having me.
>>NOORY: Thank you.
Lucid dreaming.
When you realize that you
are dreaming in a dream,
you can do incredible things.
Try it.
I'm George Noory.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]